Add support for using declarations and async using (#672)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/classes.md

### 15.15.1 General

A function member ([§12.6](expressions.md#126-function-members)) or local function ([§13.6.4](statements.md#1364-local-function-declarations)) implemented using an iterator block ([§13.3](statements.md#133-blocks)) is called an ***iterator***. An iterator block may be used as the body of a function as long as the return type of the corresponding function is one of the enumerator interfaces ([§15.15.2](classes.md#15152-enumerator-interfaces)) or one of the enumerable interfaces ([§15.15.3](classes.md#15153-enumerable-interfaces)).

> An async function ([§15.14](classes.md#1514-async-functions)) implemented using an iterator block ([§13.3](statements.md#133-blocks)) is called an ***asynchronous iterator***. An asynchronous iterator block may be used as the body of a function as long as the return type of the corresponding function is the asynchronous enumerator interfaces ([§15.15.2](classes.md#15152-enumerator-interfaces)) or the asynchronous enumerable interfaces ([§15.15.3](classes.md#15153-enumerable-interfaces)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An async function ([§15.14](classes.md#1514-async-functions)) implemented using an iterator block ([§13.3](statements.md#133-blocks)) is called an ***asynchronous iterator***. An asynchronous iterator block may be used as the body of a function as long as the return type of the corresponding function is the asynchronous enumerator interface ([§15.15.2](classes.md#15152-enumerator-interfaces)) or the asynchronous enumerable interface ([§15.15.3](classes.md#15153-enumerable-interfaces)).
```

There's only one interface in for each of enumerator/enumerable when it comes to async, right? I guess generics make this trickier... an alternative would "is an asynchronous enumerator interface or an asynchronous enumerable interface"...

Reviewer: (I see later we refer to "the asynchronous enumerable interface" so I think my original suggestion is approprpiate.)

An iterator block may occur as a *method_body*, *operator_body* or *accessor_body*, whereas events, instance constructors, static constructors and finalizer shall not be implemented as synchronous or asynchronous iterators.

When a function is implemented using an iterator block, it is a compile-time error for the parameter list of the function to specify any `in`, `out`, or `ref` parameters, or a parameter of a `ref struct` type.

> An asynchronous iterator can support cancellation of the asynchronous operation. One parameter must be of the type `System.Threading.Tasks.CancellationToken` and be marked with the `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.EnumeratorCancellation` attribute (§enumerator-cancellation). When an asynchronous iterator has such a parameter, that `CancellationToken` is passed to `GetAsyncEnumerator`, and the enumerator's `MoveNextAsync` method.

Reviewer 2: This PR appears to have quite a chunk missing, and possibly excess baggage, or I'm missing something…

`CancellationToken` is introduced, and in an example for `EnumeratorCancellation` a value of this type is shown being used by calling `IsCancellationRequested`. The description of this type added to standard-library.md by #606 shows a type which is constructed from a boolean *constant* and I’ve found nothing in the Standard to cover how the value of `IsCancellationRequested` ever changes from this boolean constant supplied at construction – surely something is misisng here?

The description of `CancellationToken` in §C also includes a slew of members using the types `CancellationTokenRegistration` and `WaitHandle` which do not appear anywhere else in the Standard – excess baggage? Or are these methods fundamental to the value of `IsCancellationRequested` changing and so need to be described?

Reviewer: Definitely worth discussing - I haven't looked at annex C yet, but I think more description about the cancellation token would be useful here. (It's not clear why the attribute is needed - if I have a parameter *without* that attribute, what difference would that make?)

Reviewer 3: We should discuss this. The conventional approach is to use the [`CancellationTokenSource`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.threading.cancellationtokensource?view=net-9.0) type to create the token, and the client code modifies the state through its `Cancel*` methods.

From a language perspective, the `CanellationTokenSource` isn't special, it's just one way to manage a cancellation token. Does it need to be normative? Should we add an example to show this convention as informative?

Reviewer 3: Decision from the meeting:

Add one (or more) informative example that shows end to end how an async iterator supports cancel.

There should be some normative text on *how* the struct value for the `CancellationToken` changes in the operations.

Reviewer: Discussed. We'd like some normative text to introduce the concept, and then an example with CancellationTokenSource, but leaving "how cancellation tokens are cancelled" as implementation defined/specific. (We don't want to standardize CancellationTokenSource.)

### 15.15.1 General

A function member ([§12.6](expressions.md#126-function-members)) or local function ([§13.6.4](statements.md#1364-local-function-declarations)) implemented using an iterator block ([§13.3](statements.md#133-blocks)) is called an ***iterator***. An iterator block may be used as the body of a function as long as the return type of the corresponding function is one of the enumerator interfaces ([§15.15.2](classes.md#15152-enumerator-interfaces)) or one of the enumerable interfaces ([§15.15.3](classes.md#15153-enumerable-interfaces)).

> An async function ([§15.14](classes.md#1514-async-functions)) implemented using an iterator block ([§13.3](statements.md#133-blocks)) is called an ***asynchronous iterator***. An asynchronous iterator block may be used as the body of a function as long as the return type of the corresponding function is the asynchronous enumerator interface ([§15.15.2](classes.md#15152-enumerator-interfaces)) or the asynchronous enumerable interface ([§15.15.3](classes.md#15153-enumerable-interfaces)).

Reviewer 4: Can the `member ([§12.6](expressions.md#126-function-members)) or local function ([§13.6.4](statements.md#1364-local-function-declarations))` language be placed here?

Without it, it sounds like it's implying that an async function defined per `#1514-async-functions` may be implemented using an iterator block, but this not allowed for all async functions defined per `#1514-async-functions`, because that section defines async functions to include async anonymous functions. Anonymous functions may not be iterators.

An iterator block may occur as a *method_body*, *operator_body* or *accessor_body*, whereas events, instance constructors, static constructors and finalizer shall not be implemented as synchronous or asynchronous iterators.

When a function is implemented using an iterator block, it is a compile-time error for the parameter list of the function to specify any `in`, `out`, or `ref` parameters, or a parameter of a `ref struct` type.

> An asynchronous iterator can support cancellation of the asynchronous operation. This is described in §enumerator-cancellation.

Reviewer: "can support" feels a bit ambiguous here - it's unclear (as per my earlier comment) whether an implementation is required to support it. I understand that any given concrete asynchronous iterator may not specify a cancellation token, of course, but I think "Asynchronous iterators support cancellation [...]" would be clearer, assuming we *are* requiring that it's supported.

Reviewer 3: Reworded to use "shall support"

> An asynchronous iterator can support cancellation of the asynchronous operation. The convention is to use the `System.Threading.Tasks.CancellationToken` to check for cancellation. If an iterator has a parameter of the type `System.Threading.Tasks.CancellationToken` that is marked with the `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.EnumeratorCancellation` attribute (§enumerator-cancellation), the compiler may create an aggregate token that signals a cancelled request when any of the tokens indicates that cancel is requested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An asynchronous iterator can support cancellation of the asynchronous operation. The convention is to use the `System.Threading.Tasks.CancellationToken` to check for cancellation. If an iterator has a parameter of the type `System.Threading.Tasks.CancellationToken` that is marked with the `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.EnumeratorCancellation` attribute (§enumerator-cancellation), the compiler may create an aggregate token that signals a canceled request when any of the tokens indicates that cancel is requested.
```

Reviewer 3: edited following suggestion.

> An asynchronous iterator can support cancellation of the asynchronous operation. The convention is to use the `System.Threading.Tasks.CancellationToken` to check for cancellation. If an iterator has a parameter of the type `System.Threading.Tasks.CancellationToken` that is marked with the `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.EnumeratorCancellation` attribute (§enumerator-cancellation), the compiler may create an aggregate token that signals a cancelled request when any of the tokens indicates that cancel is requested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An asynchronous iterator can support cancellation of the asynchronous operation. The convention is to use a parameter of type `System.Threading.Tasks.CancellationToken` to check for cancellation. If an iterator has such a parameter, and that parameter is marked with the `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.EnumeratorCancellation` attribute (§enumerator-cancellation), the compiler may create an aggregate token that signals a canceled request when any of the tokens indicates that cancellation is requested.
```

Reviewer: The "may" here is interesting... can a conformant compiler ignore EnumeratorCancellation?

> An asynchronous iterator can support cancellation of the asynchronous operation. The convention is to use a parameter of type `System.Threading.Tasks.CancellationToken` to check for cancellation. If an iterator has such a parameter, and that parameter is marked with the `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.EnumeratorCancellation` attribute (§enumerator-cancellation), the compiler creates an aggregate token from the cancellation token provided by the caller and the one provided in `GetAsyncEnumerator`. This aggregate token signals a canceled request when either of the aggregated tokens indicates that cancellation is requested.

Reviewer 2: “The convention is…” seems wrong here, the type `CancellationToken` is required by the Standard and baked into various type signatures. The para also repeats material in §enumerator-cancellation (in `attributes.md`)

Reviewer 3: Replaced with a single sentence referring to the *attributes* clause.

> An asynchronous iterator can support cancellation of the asynchronous operation. The convention is to use a parameter of type `System.Threading.Tasks.CancellationToken` to check for cancellation. If an iterator has such a parameter, and that parameter is marked with the `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.EnumeratorCancellation` attribute (§enumerator-cancellation), the compiler creates an aggregate token from the cancellation token provided by the caller and the one provided in `GetAsyncEnumerator`. This aggregate token signals a canceled request when either of the aggregated tokens indicates that cancellation is requested.

Reviewer 4: I feel uncomfortable defining what looks like a type name without the full type name. Taking a page from https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/blob/draft-v8/standard/classes.md#15141-general:

```suggestion
An asynchronous iterator can support cancellation of the asynchronous operation. The convention is to use a parameter of type `System.Threading.Tasks.CancellationToken` to check for cancellation. If an iterator has such a parameter, and that parameter is marked with the attribute `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.EnumeratorCancellationAttribute` (§enumerator-cancellation), the compiler creates an aggregate token from the cancellation token provided by the caller and the one provided in `GetAsyncEnumerator`. This aggregate token signals a canceled request when either of the aggregated tokens indicates that cancellation is requested.
```

Reviewer 3: This edit is moot, as most of this paragraph was moved. I made a global change to be sure I caught all of them.

`MoveNext` returns a `bool` value whose meaning is described below. `MoveNextAsync` returns a `ValueTask<bool>` ([§15.14.3](classes.md#15143-evaluation-of-a-task-returning-async-function)). The result value of the task returned from `MoveNextAsync` has the same meaning as the result value from `MoveNext`. In the following description, the actions described for `MoveNext` apply to `MoveNextAsync` with the following difference: Where stated that `MoveNext` returns `true` or `false`, `MoveNextAsync` sets its task to the *completed* state, and sets the task’s result value to the corresponding `true` or `false` value.

> The `MoveNextAsync` method includes an optional `CancellationToken` parameter. The argument is the token marked with the `EnumeratorCancellation` attribute of the iterator (§15.15.1).

Reviewer 2: The `MoveNextAsync` iterator specified in §C.3 has no optional parameter…

Reviewer: Indeed - not quite sure how we ended up in that state.

Reviewer 3: Good catch. I misread the section of the speclet on [cancellation](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/csharp-8.0/async-streams.md#cancellation). The agreed solution is to pass the cancellation token to `GetEnumeratorAsync`, and not add it to `MoveNextAsync`.

I did add the default parameter to the `GetEnumeratorAsync()` method.

Reviewer: Unresolved, as I think we need to change this text. (I'm currently too sleepy to determine whether we just need to remove the paragraph, or move it to where we talk about GetEnumeratorAsync.)

Reviewer: I *think* we just remove it, as new line 5639 seems to cover it.

Reviewer 3: removed after verifying that line 5639 does cover it. (now 5637).

When `MoveNext` executes the iterator block, execution can be interrupted in four ways: By a `yield return` statement, by a `yield break` statement, by encountering the end of the iterator block, and by an exception being thrown and propagated out of the iterator block.

> > *Note*: `MoveNextAsync` can be suspended if it contains an `await` expression that awaits a task type that hasn't completed. *end note*

Reviewer: Should this be "is suspended"? And should it be normative? (It feels to me like without this, the behavior isn't fully described.)

Reviewer 3: I didn't think it needed to be normative here. The reason is that `MoveNextAsync` has a return type that is a task type. Therefore, the method can have the `async` modifier. Therefore, it can have `await` expressions, and can be suspended. The returned task would be in the "running" state, as with any async method.

Reviewer: Added a suggestion for the "is" part, resolving for the normative side.

> > *Note*: `MoveNextAsync` can be suspended if it contains an `await` expression that awaits a task type that hasn't completed. *end note*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> *Note*: `MoveNextAsync` is suspended if it evaluates an `await` expression that awaits a task type that hasn't completed. *end note*
```

#### 15.15.6.1 General

When a function member or local function returning an enumerable interface type or an async enumerable interface type is implemented using an iterator block, invoking the function does not immediately execute the code in the iterator block. Instead, an ***enumerable object*** is created and returned.

> A synchronous enumerable object implements `IEnumerable` and `IEnumerable<T>` or `IAsyncEnumerable<T>`, where `T` is the yield type of the iterator. Its `GetEnumerator` returns an enumerator object (§15.15.5). An async enumerable object implements `IAsyncEnumerable<T>` where `T` is the yield type of the iterator. Its `GetAsyncEnumerator` returns an asynchronous enumerator object  (§15.15.5).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A synchronous enumerable object implements `IEnumerable` and `IEnumerable<T>` or `IAsyncEnumerable<T>`, where `T` is the yield type of the iterator. Its `GetEnumerator` method returns an enumerator object (§15.15.5). An async enumerable object implements `IAsyncEnumerable<T>` where `T` is the yield type of the iterator. Its `GetAsyncEnumerator` method returns an asynchronous enumerator object  (§15.15.5).
```

#### 15.15.6.1 General

When a function member or local function returning an enumerable interface type or an async enumerable interface type is implemented using an iterator block, invoking the function does not immediately execute the code in the iterator block. Instead, an ***enumerable object*** is created and returned.

> A synchronous enumerable object implements `IEnumerable` and `IEnumerable<T>` or `IAsyncEnumerable<T>`, where `T` is the yield type of the iterator. Its `GetEnumerator` method returns an enumerator object (§15.15.5). An async enumerable object implements `IAsyncEnumerable<T>` where `T` is the yield type of the iterator. Its `GetAsyncEnumerator` method returns an asynchronous enumerator object  (§15.15.5).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A synchronous enumerable object implements `IEnumerable` and `IEnumerable<T>`, where `T` is the yield type of the iterator. Its `GetEnumerator` method returns an enumerator object (§15.15.5). An async enumerable object implements `IAsyncEnumerable<T>` where `T` is the yield type of the iterator. Its `GetAsyncEnumerator` method returns an asynchronous enumerator object  (§15.15.5).
```

An enumerable object may implement more interfaces than those specified above.

> *Note*: For example, an enumerable object may also implement `IEnumerator` and `IEnumerator<T>`, enabling it to serve as both an enumerable and an enumerator. Typically, such an implementation would return its own instance (to save allocations) from the first call to `GetEnumerator`. Subsequent invocations of `GetEnumerator`, if any, would return a new class instance, typically of the same class, so that calls to different enumerator instances will not affect each other. *end note*

#### 15.15.6.2 The GetEnumerator or GetAsyncEnumerator method

An enumerable object provides an implementation of the `GetEnumerator` methods of the `IEnumerable` and `IEnumerable<T>` interfaces. The two `GetEnumerator` methods share a common implementation that acquires and returns an available enumerator object. The enumerator object is initialized with the argument values and instance value saved when the enumerable object was initialized, but otherwise the enumerator object functions as described in [§15.15.5](classes.md#15155-enumerator-objects).

> An asynchronous enumerable object provides an implementation of the `GetAsyncEnumerator` method of the `IAsyncEnumerable<T>` interface. This method returns an available asynchronous enumerator object. The enumerator object is initialized with the argument values and instance value saved when the enumerable object was initialized, including the optional cancellation token, but otherwise the enumerator object functions as described in [§15.15.5](classes.md#15155-enumerator-objects). An asynchronous iterator method can mark one parameter as the cancellation token using the `EnumeratorCancellation` attribute (§enumerator-cancellation). An implementation shall provide a mechanism to combine cancellation tokens such that an asynchronous iterator is cancelled when either cancellation token (the argument to `GetAsyncEnumerator` or the argument attributed with `EnumeratorCancellation`) requests cancellation. One way to implement this is to use the `CreateLinkedTokenSource` method of the `CancellationTokenSource` class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An asynchronous enumerable object provides an implementation of the `GetAsyncEnumerator` method of the `IAsyncEnumerable<T>` interface. This method returns an available asynchronous enumerator object. The enumerator object is initialized with the argument values and instance value saved when the enumerable object was initialized, including the optional cancellation token, but otherwise the enumerator object functions as described in [§15.15.5](classes.md#15155-enumerator-objects). An asynchronous iterator method can mark one parameter as the cancellation token using the `EnumeratorCancellation` attribute (§enumerator-cancellation). An implementation shall provide a mechanism to combine cancellation tokens such that an asynchronous iterator is canceled when either cancellation token (the argument to `GetAsyncEnumerator` or the argument attributed with `EnumeratorCancellation`) requests cancellation. One way to implement this is to use the `CreateLinkedTokenSource` method of the `CancellationTokenSource` class.
```

> An asynchronous enumerable object provides an implementation of the `GetAsyncEnumerator` method of the `IAsyncEnumerable<T>` interface. This method returns an available asynchronous enumerator object. The enumerator object is initialized with the argument values and instance value saved when the enumerable object was initialized, including the optional cancellation token, but otherwise the enumerator object functions as described in [§15.15.5](classes.md#15155-enumerator-objects). An asynchronous iterator method can mark one parameter as the cancellation token using the `EnumeratorCancellation` attribute (§enumerator-cancellation). An implementation shall provide a mechanism to combine cancellation tokens such that an asynchronous iterator is cancelled when either cancellation token (the argument to `GetAsyncEnumerator` or the argument attributed with `EnumeratorCancellation`) requests cancellation. One way to implement this is to use the `CreateLinkedTokenSource` method of the `CancellationTokenSource` class.

Reviewer: The "**shall** [...] such that an asyncronous iterator **is** cancelled" here seems to conflict with the "may" I mentioned earlier.

An enumerable object provides an implementation of the `GetEnumerator` methods of the `IEnumerable` and `IEnumerable<T>` interfaces. The two `GetEnumerator` methods share a common implementation that acquires and returns an available enumerator object. The enumerator object is initialized with the argument values and instance value saved when the enumerable object was initialized, but otherwise the enumerator object functions as described in [§15.15.5](classes.md#15155-enumerator-objects).

> An asynchronous enumerable object provides an implementation of the `GetAsyncEnumerator` method of the `IAsyncEnumerable<T>` interface. This method returns an available asynchronous enumerator object. The enumerator object is initialized with the argument values and instance value saved when the enumerable object was initialized, including the optional cancellation token, but otherwise the enumerator object functions as described in [§15.15.5](classes.md#15155-enumerator-objects). An asynchronous iterator method can mark one parameter as the cancellation token using the `EnumeratorCancellation` attribute (§enumerator-cancellation). An implementation shall provide a mechanism to combine cancellation tokens such that an asynchronous iterator is canceled when either cancellation token (the argument to `GetAsyncEnumerator` or the argument attributed with the attribute `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.EnumeratorCancellationAttribute`) requests cancellation.

Reviewer 4: Maybe? Should these match?
```suggestion
An asynchronous enumerable object provides an implementation of the `GetAsyncEnumerator` method of the `IAsyncEnumerable<T>` interface. This method returns an available asynchronous enumerator object. The enumerator object is initialized with the argument values and instance value saved when the enumerable object was initialized, including the optional cancellation token, but otherwise the enumerator object functions as described in [§15.15.5](classes.md#15155-enumerator-objects). An asynchronous iterator method can mark one parameter as the cancellation token using `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.EnumeratorCancellationAttribute` (§enumerator-cancellation). An implementation shall provide a mechanism to combine cancellation tokens such that an asynchronous iterator is canceled when either cancellation token (the argument to `GetAsyncEnumerator` or the argument attributed with the attribute `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.EnumeratorCancellationAttribute`) requests cancellation.
```
